exhilarating 	- very exciting and enjoyable
nigh on a years - téměř léta; (old-fashioned) almost, near

>by your leave 	- s vaším dovolením
>by all means 	- bezevšeho, všemi prostředky (certainly, absolutely); I will attempt to get there by all means.
>be my guest 	- poslušte si (help yourself, after you); Can I get that? =By my guest.

hardship 	- utrpení, strádání
upon my word 	- na mou duši (čest), (indeed, really); upon my honor, upon my naked word
mark my word(s) - remember what I'm telling you
time is upon us - v kontextu nemáme moc času
since when 	- od kdy; since when I need your premission
since always    - odjakživa
ever since      - již od té doby

we are in a dive - padáme (e.g. in aeroplane)
close encounter(s) of the third kind - blízké(á) setkání třetího druhu

i.e. - tj.   (id est); 	       that is to say
e.g. - např. (exempli gratia); for example
etc. - atd.  (et cetera);      and so on

>State your business, or prepare to get winged!

state your business - ohlašte se (dejte o sobě vědět) 
get winged - to shoot (a bird) in the wing, so as to disable it from flying without killing it (to wound (a person) with a shot in the arm or shoulder, or some other not vital part)

stumble 	- škobrtat, klopítat; Who's that stumblin' around in the dark? (Kdo(Čí) je to klopítání...)
weary		- vyčerpaný, znavený; I'm simply a fellow weary traveler.(...znavený 'spolucestující')

go by the name of sth - být znám pot sth jménem; I'm looking for a pair of slave trader, that go by the name of the Speck Brothers.

quit while you're ahead - v nejlepším přestat; one should stop doing something that's rewarding but risky before
			  something bad happens

sentence x clause - A Clause is a part of a Sentence that usually contains a Subject and a Verb.
		  - sentence (věta), clause (věta holá)

Real deal - someone or something that is very good and has all the qualities that people say they have
	  - the facts about something
What's the real deal? - slang phrasing of the question: What is REALLY going on; What's the truth of the matter?

Talcum powder - zásyp, pudr
He's natural  - Má talent
Step forth    - also Step forward

Bart's Blackboard - Eye well knot d+face = I will not deface (zohyzdit).(from Simpsons)
take shape        - projevit se, formovat se, rýsovat se (A new song began to take shape in her mind.)
take advantage    - využít (The train arrived on time so I got to work in time.)

just in time      - v posledním okamžiku, jen tak tak
right on time     - přesně na čas
in time           - včas, there is a deadline
on time           - včas, na čas; there is an expected time
at the time       - tou dobou, v té době
The train arrived on time so I got to work in time.

harvested energy - získaná energie, energy harvesting - získávání energie
proportional     - úměrný, přiměřený; directly/inversely proportional - přímo/nepřímo úměrný
efficiently      - efektivně, účinně
utilize     	 - využít, upotřebit
transient	 - přechodný, krátkodobý
a buck (converter)  - převodník; step-down DC to DC converter; buck - babka, dolar
a boost (converter) - převodník; step-up DC to DC converter

freeze                       - ani hnout
it is safe to say            - used to say that you are confident about what you are going to say
Suffice it to say that..     - Postačí řeknu-li, že..
time's up                    - čas vypršel
appearances can be deceiving - zdání může klamat

it is inevitable - je to nevyhnutelné
behold this for it is a carrot
they all about it knew it was so (literary)
What can I help you with?

indifferent              - lhostejný, nezajímavý
aka                      - also known as
I have not slept in days - Už dny jsem nespal

kritický stav (pacienta):
 critical condition - high risk of death within 24 hours
 serious condition  - reduced risk of death within 24 hours, but requiring frequent observation

business trip - pracovní/služební cesta
two grand     - dva tácy (tisíce)
been bugged   - having hidden electronic eavesdropping devices (mít štěnici)

And the crowd went absolutely bananas (go bananas - wildly enthusiastic)
and lo, he held in his hand, a white rabbit - a hle,...

open secret      - veřejné tajemství
likewise         - nápodobně (při podání ruky: ‘Let me know if you ever need any help.’ ‘Likewise.’)
frankly          - upřímně
how can I put it - jak to říct (podat )
kiddo 		 - dítě
hood of car      - kapota
overwhelmed      - ohromený, uchvácený

all + noun
all/all of + determiner (the, my, this,...) noun
all of + pronoun
I thank you all or I thank all of you

'roly-poly, chubby-cheeked shit-machine' (meaning a baby)

What can I do you for? (Instead of What can I do for you?)
The impression is that the speaker is a sly dog who commonly swindles people and is not likely to be swindled himself. It is playfully confrontational. If said to a friend, it's a joke. If said to a stranger, it can be almost a warning.
'What can I do you for ?' means 'How much can I swindle you out of ?'
"TO DO somebody for something" is to cheat somebody, usually out of money

fender bender            - drobná automobilová nehoda
as for me, in my opinion - podle mě, pokud jde o mě
it's crowded here        - je tu přeplněno
buck the system          - vzdorovat (vzepřít se) systému
nibble                   - a group of four bits (data unit), also a bit of sth

blink - with both eyes (naturally), also if you scared someone, and you think someone is lying; You blinked!
wink  - one eye (on purpose)

payphone (veřejný telefon) <> cellphone (mobil)

to act on selfish impulse (on impulse - spontánně, impulsivně) - jednat sobecky
it doesn't ring a bell (to cause someone to remember something or for it to seem familiar) - nic mi to neříká

guard (low and high gurd) - obranný postoj (kryt)
over the fance            - nepřijatelný
thee                      - ty (Be brave and upright that God may love thee - Buďte stateční a čestní, aby vás Bůh miloval)
heels                     - boty s vysokým podpadkem
fly-by (also flyover)     - the flight of a spacecraft near a planet to record data

QED - quantum electrodynamics, (quod erat demonstratum) - which was to be prove (means that is what I wanted to proved and I have proved it)

rather       - přesněji řečeno
long for sth - toužit po něčem
dearie       - miláčku, drhoušku
heinie       - hýždě, zadek (use as highness)
head off     - odříznout cestu, nadběhnout
hand over    - podat, předat
shoo         - kšc, kšá
run-in                    - rozepře
good value for your money - dobrý poměr cena výkon
gnosis                    - gnose (nadsmyslové poznání boha vedoucí ke spáse)
nigh                      - blízko (the end is nigh)

...
SAILING:
port 	     - levobok;  hard a port       - ostře do leva
starboard    - pravobok; hard to starboard - ostře do prava
cruise ship  - výletní loď
HMS          - his/her majesty's ship
broadside    - námoř. salva ze všech děl na jedné straně lodi, bokem, nadhladinový bok lodi
foreyard     - nejnižší ráhno předního stěžně
whitecap     - zpětný hřeben vlny (a wave with a white broken crest (hřeben vlny))
High sea     - volné moře, za hranicích teritoriálních vod
West Indies  - Antily
doldrums     - From the place in the ocean near the equator where there are sudden periods of calm, a sailing ship caught in this area can be stuck there because of a lack of wind
.
creek (říčka), gulf, bay - záliv:
creek  - narrow area of sea (Br), small river (Ame)
gulf   - large area of sea partly surrounded by land
bay    - area partly surrounded by a wide curve of land
(creek>gulf>bay) při pohledu z moře je 'creek' nejvíce opklopen pevninou a 'bay' nejméně
.
headland, cape, promontory - mys:
headland   - peninsula but usually smaller
cape       - headland that affects the flow surface and subsurface ocean currents (Cape of Good Hope)
promontory - high point of land (usually with cliffs)
(Hornův mys - The Horn)
...

Teenage kicks - the teenage variety of fun
you will be speaking on behalf of the team - budete mluvit za tým (zastupovat)

...
Avantasia (AVAlon - faNTASIA):
Misprizing - Chastising  Opovrhování - Kárání
Subhuman fragmentizing   Nelidské tříštění
Sensation - Aberration   Pocit - Poblouznění
Repulsive tantalizing    Odpudivé podráždění
....

Don't you... = Do you not..
by far  - zdaleka (na konec věty)
grow on - přirůst k srdci (This place grows on me.)
Trespassers will be prsecuted! - Cizím osobám vstup zakázán!
portmanteau word - combination of more word (spork, motel,...)

keep sth back - zatajit
keep sb in    - nechat někoho po škole
go commando   - být na ostro
crabby        - podrážděný
buckle up     - připoutejte se
decaf         - káva bez kofeinu
hit on smb    - vyjíždět po někom
peck          - letmo políbit

He caters to my every whim - Dělá co mi na očích vidí
The unbearable lightness of being
It's small, it's tiny it's petty, it's wee.

grab a spoon - More like a metaphore than a slang word grab a spoon means that women are like different types of ice-cream and that you should grab a spoon (meaning that you should get back on the game)
well up      - come up (as of feelings and thoughts, or other ephemeral things); "Strong emotions welled up"
Are you welling up - Ty pláčeš

Adam's apple      - ohryzek
As opposed to sth - na rozdíl od něčeho
flashing someone  -  briefly displaying nudity (I will flash you.) 
smack-up          - přesně
within reach      - v dosahu (vzdálenosti)
buck/butt naked   - totally naked
curb wheels       - turn wheels to the curb (on the hillside)
overhead bin      - zásobník (přihrádka) na zavazadla v letadle, luggage rack - přihrádka ve vlaku
goods             - zboží

..., not that it matters  - ..., ne, že by na tom záleželo
you're one to talk        - ty máš co mluvit
Chap Stick (or chapstick) - jelení lůj
looking glass             - mirror (old-fashioned)
vividly                   - živě (I vividly remember it.)
surreal (so real)         - neskutečný (nesmírně skutečný)
chick (chicken)           - ptáče
on sb's behalf            - jménem někoho, jako zástupce
I can't stand that woman. - Nemůžu vystát...
he thought better of it   - rozmyslel si to
You're in Sample (Sign); same pronaounciation as urine
cereal (serial) killer

Seesaw (dvouramenná) x Swing (závěsná) - houpačka
Grass x Lawn - lawn implies grass that is taken care of somehow (you mow it, water it, etc.).
He spent the day mooning around. - Celý den se jen tak poflakoval. (moon - vystrkovat (holý) zadek)

don't have a guts - nemít odvahu
resolution        - předsevzetí (New Year's resolution)
It takes its toll - vybrat si daň, žádat si oběti
Apple of my eye   - Originally meaning the central aperture of the eye. Figuratively it is something, or more usually someone, cherished above others.
Although (beginning), though (end of sentence) - ačkoli, ikdyž

Needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few
Through and through - skrz na skrz (You're pirate trhough and through)
Don't give up on me - Nevzdávej to se mnou
The painful part is over, I've come out the other side a little bit stronger. (V podstatě: co mě nazabije, to mě posílí)

baby shower  - party given for a woman who is going to have a baby, at which her friends give her presents for the baby
fly the coop - vzít roha; narážka na kuře snžící se dostat z kurníku (I couldn't stand the party, so I flew the coop.)

clockwise - pravotočivý, podle směru hodinových ručiček
Anticlockwise (Br), Counterclockwise (Ame) - levotočivý, proti směru hodinových ručiček
